Title: The Brain Science of Storytelling
Source Identifier (URL/ID): m1drR3oaVGc
Media Source: YouTube
Duration: 0:05:56
Channel: GordianBusiness
Publish Date: 2014-01-30
YouTube Video ID: m1drR3oaVGc
CSV Video ID (for log reference): m1drR3oaVGc
Views: 19970
Description: Subscribe to our channel for more great videos on Persuading For Results. Check out our website http://www.gordianbusiness.com.au/persuading-for-results/

Paul Zak explains how when someone hears a story the brain emits chemicals making them more likely to act. When persuading this shows the power of using stories to get someone to act.
Keywords: Paul Zak, Story, Persuasion, Storytelling, Persuading For Results, Research
Transcript Source: YouTube API
Overall Status: Transcript Success (YouTube API), Metadata Success (yt-dlp)
Processing Details: YouTube API transcript fetched.
------------------------------
Transcript:
I want to tell you a story about a
little boy named Ben Ben is 2 and 1/2
years old and Ben has brain cancer and
Ben's really happy he's happy because
he's been through two rounds of chemo
and radiation and he feels good for once
he doesn't feel yucky and his father's
enjoying seeing Ben's happiness but as
the father tells the story of Ben and
his cancer the father's voice begins to
break and he says you know it's very
difficult to play with Ben because Ben
thinks everything is wonderful but I
know something that Ben doesn't that
Ben's
dying and he talks about how difficult
it is to play with Ben knowing that in 3
or 6 months Ben will be dead and yet Ben
is so happy he's so beautiful
and so the father tries as hard as he
can to enjoy Ben to be joyful around Ben
but then he says in the middle of this
short story that it's an amazing thing
to know how little time one has left and
as he says that statement he has merged
himself with his son is as if the father
himself is
dying so in my laboratory we've studied
this story extensively and we found is
that two primary emotions were elicited
one is distress and the other is empathy
at the same time when we ask people what
they felt after the story was over we
really couldn't get very clear answers
so began doing other studies on this
story so we took blood before and after
and we found that the brain produced two
interesting chemicals one is called
cortisol which focuses our attention on
something important so cortisol
correlated with our sense of distress so
the more distress you the more cortisol
You released and the more you paid
attention to that stimulus the second
chemical release is called oxytocin
which is associated with care and
connection and empathy and oxytocin was
correlated with people's sense of
empathy and the more oxytocin they
released the more empathic they felt
towards Ben and his father now we did
something different after this
experiment we gave individuals a chance
to share money with a stranger in the
lab and indeed those who produced both
cortisol and oxytocin were more likely
to donate money generously to a stranger
they couldn't see in the lab in another
experiment we gave individuals a chance
to donate money to a charity that works
with children who are ill and indeed
those who released oxytocin or cortisol
donated money to this charity in fact
the amount of oxytocin released
predicted in both cases how much money
people would share with a stranger or
with Charity what we're seeing is that
this narrative is changing Behavior by
changing our brain
chemistry so we decided to go a little
further and ask could we actually
predict before they watch the video who
would donate money to charity so with
funding from the defense Advanced
research projects agency DARPA we reran
the study in which we not only took
blood but now we measured heart rate and
skin conductance and respiration and
using these additional measures we're
able to identify this distressed
response and this empathic response and
we could predict with 80% accuracy who
would donate money to charity these
individuals get paid about $20 to be an
experiment and the people who donated
money on average donated half their
earnings so we began to investigate this
story further we used functional brain
Imaging to identify the regions in the
brain that were most active while
watching that video compared to a
control video in which Ben and his
father were at the zoo and we found was
that the most active areas for the
emotional story where areas in the brain
associated with theory of mind or
understanding of what others are doing
and areas that are rich in oxytocin
receptors that make us feel empathy and
guess what happens when you watch
seconds of a father and son at the zoo
nothing happens and people just blank
out there's no reason for them to attend
to this information because nothing's
happening there's nothing exciting it's
important to understand that stories
have to have this particular structure
150 years ago a German theorist named
freeg called this the dramatic Arc so
there are particular story aspects that
go into making an effective story
Exposition rising action climax falling
action and then this Denon the story of
Ben and his father talking about knowing
his son is dying has those aspects it
captures their attention there's a
coming climax how can Ben's father
actually engage with his son in this
wonderful relaxed playful way yet
knowing that his son will die soon it
seems like there may be a universal kind
of story structure So Stories are
powerful because they transport us into
other people's worlds but in doing that
they change the way our brains work and
potentially change our brain chemistry
and that's what it means to be a social
creature is to connect to others to care
about others even complete strangers and
it's so interesting that dramatic
stories cause us to do this in these
experiments they do it in a very
functional way people are donating money
because they want to help Ben and his
father and yet when we watch other
stories or see movies listen to music
the same thing can happen we feel
uplifted we feel motivated we feel
connected to others around us